Intervening in the human germline
Executive summaryIntroduction1) Molecular instruments that permit the targeted modification of the genomes of living organismsare developing rapidly. As a result, the possibility of intervening more easily andprecisely in the human germline is drawing closer and closer.2) This raises the question whether the previous categorical rejection of germline interventionscan be upheld or whether it must undergo a new ethical assessment. An assessmentof this nature must include a broad spectrum of very different aspects. They range fromparents' wishes over the anticipation of the needs of future children to social concerns andour understanding of what it means to be human.3) In September 2017, the German Ethics Council issued an ad hoc recommendation callingfor a broad social debate on human germline interventions. This Opinion is the Council’scontribution to this debate. In it, the Council discusses the relevant ethical concepts thatoffer orientation on the different application scenarios for germline interventions. In theconcluding summary, it outlines decision paths that set out the different lines of argumentation.4) The alleged birth of genetically modified twin sisters in China at the end of 2018 underlinesthe urgent need to reach an understanding on how to responsibly handle the issue ofhuman germline interventions, even if their introduction into medical practice is still along way off given the current state of technology. A global consensus at least on theminimum ethical requirements seems indispensable no matter how difficult this might beto achieve.Scientific and medical foundations5) The information on the structure and the function of all cells in an organism is passed onfrom generation to generation through DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) in the cell nucleus.Individual meaningful segments of DNA, which code for a certain protein, for example,are called genes. Their activity is determined by a complex interplay of interactions withthe products of other genes and with external factors, many aspects of which are far frombeing fully understood.56) The human genome is predominantly organised as chromosomes consisting of two longDNA strands wound into a double helix. The human genome consists of 23 pairs of chromosomes.A child inherits one chromosome of each pair from its mother and one from itsfather.7) The gene copies inherited from a mother and a father often differ slightly from one another.In these cases, the child is heterozygous for this gene. If it carries two identicalcopies of a gene on both chromosomes, it is homozygous for that gene. It can then passon only this gene variant to its offspring.8) New gene variants are created by mutations, for example due to environmental influencessuch as radiation or chemicals or during normal cell metabolism, when copying DNAbefore cell division, and through errors in repairing damage of this kind to DNA. Variantsthat cause disease or significantly increase the risk of disease are rare compared to moreneutral variants.9) If mutations affect cells from which eggs and sperm are later produced, they have reachedthe germline and can thus be passed on to offspring. The germline connects an individualwith all his or her descendants via his or her own gametes and with his or her ancestorsvia the gametes from which he or she first originated. The germline includes not only thegametes but also all their precursor cells, including the cells of the early embryo.10) Some mutations stop the proteins encoded by a gene from being produced or lead to thembeing produced only in an altered form or quantity. This can cause disease or impact therisk of disease.11) Diseases caused by mutation in a single gene are referred to as monogenic disorders.Some of them only occur when both gene copies carry the mutation - they are recessive.Other mutations act in a dominant way: The affected person already becomes ill if onlyone of the two gene copies carries the mutation.12) If the occurrence of a disease depends on several gene sites or if environmental influencesalso play a role, it is referred to as a polygenic or multifactorial disorder. Many commondiseases are multifactorial disorders.13) The distinction between the monogenic, polygenic and multifactorial inheritance of geneticsusceptibility and other traits is something of an idealisation. The phenotypic impactof individual gene variants is always influenced by other genetic and non-genetic factors.614) Genome editing is the term used for techniques that can be used to make targeted changesto previously defined parts of the genome. There are several molecular approaches andtools that can be used to pursue this goal. CRISPR-based techniques (CRISPR: clusteredregularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) have attracted particular attention in recentyears.15) Genome editing approaches precisely modify a target sequence in the DNA, eitherthrough a cut or through biochemical modification. Cuts can lead to the removal of DNAfragments, to the insertion of new DNA fragments at a cutting site, or to a combinationof both.16) During the repair of cut sites, errors can occur that cause DNA fragments to be incorrectlyreassembled or completely deleted. These unintended effects at the target site are alsoreferred to as on-target effects. If the DNA is also cut at other sites in the genome that aresimilar to the actual target sequence but are not themselves the target of the intervention,this is referred to as an off-target effect.17) It is difficult to predict the clinical consequences of these unintended modifications, especiallywhen it comes to the genome editing of germline cells. One of the reasons forthis is that most genes assume different functions in different tissues, at different stagesof development, or even in different signalling cascades within one and the same cell.18) The prerequisite for any clinical application of genome editing in germline cells is thatundesirable side effects can largely be ruled out and that the desired gene alterations cannevertheless be precisely achieved. Extensive research is being carried out to improve theaccuracy of the methods and to reliably detect side effects in the genome.19) Ensuring that a prospective child carries a desired gene variant in the nucleus of all itscells from the beginning of its development is currently only possible with preimplantationgenetic diagnosis (PGD) and the selection of only those embryos that already havethe desired trait. This technique does not involve any direct modifications to the DNA inthe cell nucleus.20) Direct germline interventions in the nuclear genome presuppose that genome editing toolscan reach germline cells and unfold their action there. In principle, this could happen inalready existing embryos, in gametes or in germline stem cells. Each of these options isassociated with different difficulties, opportunities and risks.721) Intervening in the genome of existing embryos frequently leads to mosaicism, where notall cells of the resulting organism are altered in the same way. This is because genomeediting tools, even if they are injected at the single cell stage, do not spread fully or becomefully effective until after the first cell divisions have begun. The intended processesof molecular change may then differ from cell to cell. Some cells may not be reached atall. Mosaicism cannot be reliably ruled out with PGD, as it can only examine individualcells.22) Directly treating gametes prior to fertilisation might be one way of reducing or avoidingmosaicism. However, the special structure of mature gametes and their genomes poses itsown challenges to the use of genome editing. Here, too, the success of the interventioncannot be verified before the embryo is created, since the mature gamete cannot be geneticallyexamined after treatment without it being destroyed in the process. In addition,it might be that gametes that are not affected by an undesired gene variant would also betreated because they could not be identified prior to treatment.23) Definite proof that a germline intervention has produced the desired result with no undesirableside effects could only be furnished if the procedure were to be performed in cellsthat can be genetically tested before they are used to create an embryo. This would bepossible, for example, if viable human gametes could, in future, be obtained from culturedgerm cell precursor cells or in stem cells generated from reprogrammed body cells. Thishas already been done in animal experiments, but not yet in humans.24) With the techniques available at the present time, germline interventions would not bereversible in the first generation. However, germline interventions could theoretically bereversed in the offspring of a genetically modified human by using genome editing againat the beginning of their development to undo the original edit.25) Genome editing is still a very young field of research, which is why the basic techniquesobviously still require considerable study and further development. Both the research objectivesand the experimental systems available for each project may be of relevance forlater ethical assessment.26) Basic research, application-oriented preclinical research and clinical trials all have differentresearch objectives. Basic research focusses on elucidating previously unknownmechanisms, structures or functional contexts not primarily in conjunction with a concreteapplication perspective. Application-oriented preclinical research examines thequestion of whether and, if so, how interventions in the germline could be carried over8into practice but confines itself to non-human systems or research on human cells in vitro.Allowing genetically modified germline cells or embryos to develop into human beingsshould only be considered within the framework of clinical trials in order to determinethe safety and efficacy of these interventions.27) The experimental approaches that can be considered for research on germline interventionsencompass research on animal and human cell cultures, but also on laboratory animals,synthetic human entities with embryo-like features (SHEEFs) and early human embryosin vitro.28) Should the technologies mature, germline interventions would probably be used, for theforeseeable future, primarily in the context of pioneering clinical applications in reproductivemedicine. For these applications, at least three conceivable goals can be identified:firstly, the prevention of genetic disorders; secondly, the reduction of disease risks,and thirdly, the optimisation of certain traits or abilities (enhancement).29) The avoidance of monogenic disorders is a frequently mentioned potential field of applicationfor germline interventions. In these cases, it can be assumed that the successfulcorrection of a single disease-causing mutation in germline cells would lead to a child notbeing clinically affected by this disorder.30) Whether such an intervention could ever be considered appropriate in practice wouldprobably also depend on whether clinically proven alternatives such as PGD, which maybe less risky for the child, are available. There are few cases in which this is definitelynot the case - for example, if both parents themselves are clinically affected by a recessivelyinherited metabolic disease like cystic fibrosis. In this case, both parents carry adisease-relevant variant on both gene copies and all their children would inevitably alsobe clinically affected.31) Normally, however, depending on the specific inheritance pattern and genetic status ofboth parents, between 25 and 75 percent of their offspring will not be clinically affectedby the disease. If affected parents fulfil their wish of having genetically related children,PGD permits the selection of unaffected embryos. If germline interventions were to beused instead in such cases, they would also have to be performed on potentially unaffectedembryos, as it would not be possible to determine in advance which gametes carry thepathological gene variant.932) In contrast to monogenic disorders, the risk of polygenic or multifactorial diseases is determinedby a complex interaction between several genetic determinants (polygenic) oradditional external factors, for example environmental influences (multifactorial).33) There are only two cases in which an intervention in the germline to prevent polygenicand multifactorial diseases would have any chance of success: either a single gene wouldmake such a major contribution to the overall disease risk that its modification wouldhave a clearly preventive or mitigating effect. Or, it would be possible to simultaneouslymodify several gene variants that influence the risk of disease resulting in the overall riskbeing markedly reduced.34) The correction of a germline mutation in the Breast Cancer 1 (BRCA1) gene could, forexample, reduce the breast cancer risk of a woman affected by this form of familial breastcancer from about 75 percent to the level of the general female population of about 12percent.35) In contrast, in late onset Alzheimer’s disease most genetic risk factors known to date onlyslightly increase the risk of developing the disease. One exception is the apolipoproteinE-4 gene variant. A single copy of this triples the disease risk. If two alleles are present,the risk increases 15-fold.36) The use of genetic interventions to "improve" or extend certain physical, mental or personalityfunctions or traits of healthy individuals is likewise referred to as genetic enhancement.In the narrower sense, this can be understood as an attempt to produce orenhance certain desired traits in offspring that are not directly related to a disease. However,the dividing line between this use and therapeutic or preventive medical measuresis by no means unproblematic.37) The spectrum of potential enhancements is very broad and very complex. Interventionscould be initiated at a single gene site, for example to increase athletic performance byaltering the erythropoietin receptor gene, a certain variant of which leads to increased redblood cell production. In contrast, many other target traits such as intelligence or longevityare multifactorial are extremely complex. This means that the chances of success ofgermline interventions would be much more uncertain in their case.38) In summary, it can be stated that interventions in the human germline are already hamperedat the technical level by numerous major obstacles. The chances of overcomingthem are still largely in the realm of speculation. The estimation of the interactions and10long-term effects associated with germline interventions are unclear, too. Before any clinicalintervention in the human germline could be carried out, the risks would have to bereduced to an acceptable level.39) The weighing up of what is considered an acceptable level may also depend on the urgencyof the parental desire for a child not affected by a specific affliction and the alternativesavailable for its treatment. However, the more complex the genetic component ofa phenotype is and the more non-genetic factors play a role in its development and manifestation,the more difficult it would be to predict the effects of germline interventions,including undesirable consequences.The legal framework40) The legal norms for germline interventions in international and supranational law vary.Article 13 of the Oviedo Convention generally prohibits any intervention seeking “to introduceany modification in the genome of any descendants”. However, it has not yetbeen ratified by a number of states, including the Federal Republic of Germany.41) Article 24 of the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights ofUNESCO states that interventions in the human germline "could be contrary to humandignity". However, no explicit violation of human dignity is identified nor is a prohibitionof germline intervention explicitly stated. Rather, the International Bioethics Committeeis simply charged with the task of reviewing the situation. At the beginning of October2015, the International Bioethics Committee called on the member states to adopt a jointmoratorium on germline alteration by genome editing.42) According to Article 3 para. 2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EuropeanUnion, eugenic practices are not generally permissible. This can also be applied togermline interventions. However, therapeutic applications might be excluded. The Directiveon the legal protection of biotechnological inventions of the European Parliamentand of the Council of the European Union states that there is “a consensus within theCommunity that interventions in the human germline and the cloning of human beingsoffends against ordre public and morality“.43) The legal situation in the various national legal systems is complex. It ranges from anexplicit prohibition of interventions in the genetic makeup of human gametes and embryosin the Swiss Federal Constitution, the regulation of the permissibility of certain11research projects on embryonic stem cells in Israel, a strict licensing procedure for researchon human embryos in Great Britain to attempts in the USA to regulate research bymeans of the allocation of research funds, and selective state control in China.44) The Embryo Protection Act (ESchG) of 1990 prohibits germline modifications for thepurpose of reproduction in Germany. Beyond this, however, there are no explicit rulesfor dealing with this issue. The Basic Law, for instance, contains no explicit provisionson germline intervention.45) The EschG does not explicitly cover many of the newer technical possibilities from therecent and most recent past. Since it is designed as a penal law, it cannot cover such newdevelopments because of the principle "no criminal offence without law" (Article 103 (2)of the Basic Law), nor can it do so by analogy.46) It is in this context that that the prohibitions regulated in the ESchG are to be understood.According to Section 5 ESchG it is punishable both to artificially alter the genetic informationof a human germline cell and to use a human gamete with artificially altered geneticinformation for fertilisation. Moreover, the ESchG prohibits the production and useof human embryos for research purposes, including the testing and development ofgermline intervention techniques.47) However, the prohibition of the artificial modification of the genetic information of ahuman germline cell does not apply if the process takes place in vitro and it is ruled out,at the same time, that the modified gamete will be used for fertilisation. Nor does it applyif the nucleus of an unfertilised egg cell is replaced by the nucleus of another egg cell orby the nucleus of a somatic cell. If gametes were artificially produced from previouslygenetically modified body stem cells and used for fertilisation, this would not fall underthe ban either.Outline and application of relevant ethical concepts48) The German Ethics Council sets out those substantial normative and evaluative ethicalconcepts that provide, in its view, decisive and indispensable orientation for any ethicalassessment of germline interventions. In so doing, it seeks to avoid two forms of problemreduction: on the one hand, the reduction of the ethical assessment to purely quantitativeconsiderations of opportunities and risks, and on the other hand, any attempts to solve theproblems at hand by exclusively referring to procedural strategies.1249) Using probability calculations, risk can be defined as a function of the extent of harm andthe probability of its occurrence. However, numerical considerations of risks and opportunitiesreach their limits when a quantitative assessment is either impossible or inappropriateon ethical grounds. A pragmatic hurdle to the quantitative assessment of opportunitiesand risks would be, for example, that this involves interfering with an extremelycomplex system, the functionality of which has only been understood to a limited degreeup to now. This limits the possibilities of reliably predicting the opportunities and risksof germline interventions.50) In addition, the quantitative weighing up of certain moral goods appears to be fundamentallyunacceptable, which means they impose ethical limits to any consideration of opportunitiesand risks. This is the case, for example, where human rights are concerned.This results in opportunity-risk considerations being subjected to deontological constraints,i.e. they are constrained by moral goods that are resistant to trade-offs. The consequenceis that certain options for action may not be chosen even if their execution wouldlead to "the greatest happiness of the greatest number", but would run counter to thosemoral goods that are resistant to trade-offs.51) Human dignity has shaped bioethical discussions for many years and also represents anessential ethical concept for the debates on germline intervention. Its importance has undergoneconsiderable changes since antiquity. In modern use, "human dignity" stands forthat value which is resistant to any trade-offs and which is due to man as such and independentlyof all social provisions: man is regarded as an "end in himself". This results inthe ethical-philosophical and common jurisprudential prohibition of the "complete instrumentalisation"of any human being.52) Views differ considerably when it comes to determining those entities to which humandignity could be attributed (impregnated eggs, embryos, born humans). These differencesof opinion are, in turn, closely linked to the question of the necessary decoupling or couplingof the protection of dignity and the protection of life.53) In the case of germline interventions, the question arises as to whether they completelyinstrumentalise future persons, assign them a legally devalued status and thereby violatetheir dignity. Conversely, however, the question also arises as to whether the renunciationof germline intervention, which could spare the people concerned severe suffering, wouldnot violate their human dignity, too.1354) Because germline interventions affect future people or generations beyond the directlyaffected subjects, a "dignity of the human species" is occasionally postulated. This wouldmake the human genome the object of protection of human dignity with the consequencethat germline interventions would not be permissible. Occasionally, reference is alsomade to an "ethical self-understanding” of the species. Although this does not assign anindependent dignity to the human species as such, it does consider the conditions of symmetrythat exist between all human beings as equals which is violated when some peoplecarry out targeted interventions in the genome of others.55) In all interpretations of human dignity, however, the argumentative recourse to collectivegoods such as the genome, humanity or the human species must not undermine the formativeindividual core content of the guarantee of human dignity. A clear distinctionshould, therefore, be made between the human dignity of the individual – which is, constitutionallyspeaking, resistant to any critical weighing up – and any concepts of the“dignity of the human species” that are more open to critical appraisal.56) The ethical concept of protection of life and integrity refers to the right of every humanbeing to life and physical integrity irrespective of his or her performance. This right cannotbe challenged on ethical or legal grounds. Beyond the basic prohibition of killing, italso encompasses the opportunity to access medical assistance (in the sense of a weakclaim to basic health care).57) Whether and to what extent protection of life and integrity already applies before birth,i.e. to human embryos and foetuses as well, is, however, a subject of controversy. Thiscontroversy is also reflected in the discussion as to when human life is accorded humandignity in a comprehensive sense. It leads back to fundamental anthropological and philosophical-ethical differences in the evaluation of human development. These differencesalso imply different assessments of the legal regulations applicable in Germany. This debateis of crucial importance when discussing the permissibility of embryo research.58) More recently, there has been some discussion of whether this conflict could be avoidedby not using human embryos with normal development potential for research but insteadembryos with a built-in developmental stop or SHEEFs from which no viable humanbeings can develop. This would allow, where appropriate, further research on and improvementof the use of genome editing methods in the human germline, and the layingof the groundwork for possible clinical applications without destroying human embryos.1459) However, such entities cannot completely avoid the problems posed by questions ofmoral status. On the contrary, they reiterate the importance of the question as to whichcharacteristics are to be deemed necessary and constitutive for full protection of life andintegrity. The similarities between these entities and "ordinary" embryos must be largeenough for the knowledge gained from the former to be transferable to the latter. But themore similar and scientifically meaningful the alternatives are, the more likely it is thattheir morally significant proximity to embryos with full developmental potential will increase.60) The concept of protecting life and integrity must not be reduced to the question of thestatus of embryos or embryo-like entities. The life and integrity of human beings can alsobe endangered by failing to take certain measures. For this reason, the protection of lifeand integrity can, if necessary, demand certain actions - for example, to ward off diseasesor disease risks and to promote health.61) Freedom, as an ethical concept, initially encompasses both negative and positive freedom.Negative freedom refers to the absence of external constraints. Positive freedom is thecondition of a self-determined orientation towards one's own way of life, the meaningfulnessof which one clearly accepts and which one adopts when executing one's actions.The biographical realisation of negative and positive freedom always depends on externalconditions - especially on the (free) actions of others.62) Every research project, application or control of germline interventions affects the freedomof many stakeholders in many respects: freedom of research; in the event of a futurematurity for application, the professional freedom of physicians; freedom of reproductionof those who consider germline interventions in their future children; and the freedom ofthose future individuals who carry the intentionally altered genetic material and whoseway of life has thus been affected in a specific manner.63) The ethical concept of naturalness is mainly founded on two basic types of arguments.The first type refers to the germline as a symbolic "heritage of mankind" which imposesfundamental limits on human creative will. The second type refers to a presumed uncontrollabilityof the consequences of germline interventions, given the complexity of biologicalsystems produced over millions of years in the course of evolution. However, theargument of naturalness is often used as a placeholder to articulate a vague unease aboutthe mechanisation of the world.
Objections to arguments based on the concept of naturalness refer firstly to the concept’sextraordinarily broad spectrum of meaning, which ranges from originality and normalityto complex philosophical ideas and thus allows very different interpretations. Secondly,reference is made to man as a cultural being whose "nature" consists precisely in changinghis naturally predetermined conditions of life and action and adapting these to his or hercultural needs.65) However, the reference to the ethical concept of naturalness also appears in another, primarilyfreedom-driven argument. According to this argument, a natural mode of developmentoffers the most effective protection against any manipulative interests of thirdparties.66) The ethical concepts of non-maleficence and beneficence are used both to criticise and toadvocate interventions in the human germline. Beneficence refers to the opportunitiesoffered by germline interventions to affected persons or humankind as a whole. The principleof non-maleficence, on the other hand, is based on the assessment and evaluation ofrisks.67) Consequently, the consideration of these two ethical principles often takes the form of arisk-opportunity analysis. This, however, will not suffice if it is based on a purely objectivequantitative analysis. Consequently, other relevant ethical concepts and the qualitativedimension of non-maleficence and beneficence must be taken into account. The latterdepends on the respective perspectives of the various entities and groups involved in thisprocess.68) The ethical concept of justice demands that every person in society is actually guaranteedhis or her due. Germline interventions will presumably change the network of relationshipsbetween the members of a society. Opinions differ whether these changes wouldtend to have negative or positive effects.69) In principle, the question arises as to the extent to which and under what conditions certainattempts to modify gene variants deemed disadvantageous could actually lead to more orless justice. Political justice focuses, for example, on the extent to which the individualsand groups concerned are involved in the decision-making processes on germline interventions.Social justice focuses on the allocation of resources, i.e. on the just distributionof opportunities and risks or of the advantages and burdens of germline interventionsrespectively, as well as on their further research and development.1670) The effects of germline interventions on the allocation of resources and on the internalcohesion of societies are also regularly discussed in the context of the ethical concept ofsolidarity. “Solidarity” encompasses prosocial actions, inclinations and regulations thatare intended to support others.71) Overall, solidarity arguments can be applied to three areas, using partly different solidarityconcepts: firstly, to research objectives and the organisation of research on germlineinterventions; secondly, to the solidary financing of healthcare, and thirdly, to sociomoraleffects of germline interventions on the cohesion of society and socio-cultural patternsof interpretation.72) With reference to solidarity, one can argue both against and in favour of the applicationof germline interventions. There is potential for agreement on the demand that the practiceand the objectives of current research should always be evaluated or aligned with a viewto the social benefit and social goods. For individual application scenarios this leads onto the question of whether and, if so, how these should be integrated into the solidaritybasedstructure of the welfare state.73) The ethical concept of responsibility is relevant to the normative relationships betweenstakeholders, their actions and the institutions to which the former are personally accountable.In the context of germline interventions, it is this very aspect of an anticipatory"responsibility for the future" that is as urgent as it is difficult to determine due to thecomplexity of the possible long-term consequences of today's interventions in the humangermline.74) Different obligations may conflict with each other. In the case of germline interventions,for example, this can impact the responsibility for present and future generations. In suchcases, a distinction must be made between the existence of an obligation and the degreeto which it is binding in order to determine gradual differences in obligation. Responsibilitytowards members of future generations may, in principle, be unlimited but it isparticularly binding for close generations for good reasons.75) The briefly outlined ethical concepts that offer orientation when evaluating germline interventionsonly unfold their full potential when applied to specific scenarios. In thisOpinion, this is the case for research on germline interventions and for three potentialfields of application.76) Before germline interventions can be applied in the context of human reproduction, thereis almost unanimous agreement that extensive research must still be undertaken. Since,17given the current state of the available technologies, a transition to clinical trials is stillunanimously rejected at the present time, the German Ethics Council has concentrated itsanalysis on the application of ethical concepts that offer orientation in the context of basicand preclinical research.77) General conditions for the transition to clinical research are taken into account when discussingpossible clinical applications of germline interventions.78) The question of the social embedding of research is equally relevant. This concerns botha broad public discourse on basic and preclinical research and research into the possiblesocietal effects of clinical applications.79) In basic and preclinical research, human dignity as an ethical concept is applied on theone hand to the question of whether and to what extent research on human embryos impliesan impermissible instrumentalisation that would be considered a violation of humandignity. The answers to this question vary depending on the position adopted regardingthe moral status of the embryo.80) Human dignity also plays a role with regard to the research objective of improving theliving conditions of people born after germline interventions or of humanity as a whole.Although human dignity does not justify a claim to an optimum of research or researchbenefits, it does, however, possibly offer protection against the general exclusion of relevantresearch.81) When applying the ethical concept of protecting life and integrity, a distinction must bemade between at least four positions: the categorical rejection of all embryo research, itsexceptional approval as a last resort, its general approval – but limited to surplus embryosand certain conditions, and its approval including the specific creation of embryos forresearch purposes.82) The ethical concept of freedom is important in the context of research in several respects.They refer to freedom of research and to the freedom of persons who donate gametes orembryos for research purposes - perhaps in the context of reproductive interventions - butalso with the freedom of future individuals who could benefit from the progress madethrough research. The scope of the rights to freedom involved largely depends on whetherhuman dignity and the protection of life and integrity can demand or legitimise restrictionson research.1883) The ethical concepts of non-maleficence and beneficence in preclinical research aremainly concerned with the potential contribution of this research to a better assessmentand the optimisation of the opportunities and risks of germline interventions. Beyond theabove-mentioned problems of research on embryos, the risks that arise for donors of gametesand embryos are also relevant in this context.84) With regard to research on germline interventions, it can be deduced from the ethicalconcepts of justice and solidarity that everyone should have the chance to benefit fromsuch research in the mid- or long-term. Basic research and preclinical research shouldalready be as transparent and participatory as possible, accompanied by an appropriateand broad societal discourse. Their goals should serve the common good.85) Research on germline interventions touches on a broad spectrum of responsibilities. However,it is not easy to draw the line between the responsibility of individual researchersand collective responsibility. For this reason, it is essential that science and society engagein an appropriate discourse process on these issues, also when it comes to specifying therespective responsibilities.86) The results of such processes can also impose limits on freedom of research beyond thequestion of the general permissibility of embryo research and the concrete prerequisitesfor clinical trials, for example if there were to be indications of undesired side effects ofresearch. These may include stigmatisation or anti-solidarity effects in society or an overallnegative assessment of the expected opportunities and risks. However, restrictionsbased on such concerns may only be justified if these effects cannot be countered in anyother way.87) If further developments in basic and preclinical research are sufficiently positive, thequestion may arise one day whether, after careful consideration of the relevant ethicalprinciples that apply to research, a transition to clinical trials leading to the birth of geneticallymodified humans might be justifiable and whether, ultimately, the transition toregular application would then appear to be justifiable. This question may only be answeredon a case-by-case basis and will have to be oriented towards the established rulesand regulations for first-in-human trials.88) The application scenarios analysed in the further course of the Opinion presuppose ineach case - counterfactually - that these basic prerequisites have been met by appropriateresearch. The central question is whether certain applications might, in principle, be acceptablefrom a philosophical and ethical perspective. This is relevant for the specific19decisions that may be pending in the future both when considering the transition to clinicalresearch and when considering the transition to regular clinical application that mayfollow after such clinical studies have been successfully completed.89) The avoidance of monogenic hereditary diseases is often referred to as the most realisticand most likely goal for the application of germline interventions. Since these diseasesare predominantly determined by mutations of a single gene, a germline interventionwould have to be applied to only one gene in order to avoid them. Due to their oftensevere progression, their prevention is additionally classified as medically compelling.90) There are already possibilities for most affected persons to avoid the birth of an affectedchild, for example with the help of PGD or germ cell donations. However, potential parentsmay reject such options in principle. It is also possible that PGD may not be an optionbecause, for example, all of a couple’s embryos would be clinically affected by the disease.91) In its analysis, the German Ethics Council considers a hypothetical case in which bothparents are affected by cystic fibrosis and wish to have a child together. In this case, agermline intervention would be the only way for the parents to have a healthy child whois genetically related to both partners. They could, for example, participate in a first-inhumantrial on germline interventions if previous research had shown the technique to besufficiently safe and effective.92) In such a case, the ethical concept of human dignity does not argue against such an intervention.It is not evident that the parents’ interest would imply an instrumentalisation ofthe future child that would impair human dignity. Rather, the withholding of a possiblegermline intervention could be interpreted as a violation of the future child’s dignity,since the child would be unable to benefit from an important therapeutic possibility.93) The application of the ethical concept of protecting life and integrity leads to similar results.From it can be derived a limited right for a future child to be protected against illnessor disease risks. This would mean that failing to undertake such interventions would atleast have to be justified. This applies not only to the specifically affected future individual,but also with regard to the (not prevented) effects on future generations.94) The ethical concept of freedom becomes relevant with regard to the reproductive freedomof parents who want to have a child who is genetically related to both of them. The freedomof the future child may be negatively affected by the risks of the intervention and the20need to undergo lifelong check-ups. On the other hand, the avoidance of the disease alsoopens up new possibilities of freedom compared to living with the genetic condition.95) Arguments based on the ethical concept of naturalness are of minor importance in thegiven application scenario. Hardly anyone will consider the accidental, "natural" presenceof the cystic fibrosis gene as an aspect of human nature that is worth preserving.96) On the other hand, non-maleficence and beneficence can be referred to in many ways.Both the carrying out and the failure to carry out the germline intervention are associatedwith opportunities and risks, the extent and quality of which can only be assessed to alimited extent and require careful consideration in each individual case.97) The ethical concept of justice is linked to considerations about freedom if one sees thecompensation for genetically conditioned disadvantages by germline intervention as anopportunity to fulfil the promise of equality of democratic societies and to increase individualopportunities for freedom. But questions of political justice also play a role whenit comes to the participation of those affected in the decision-making process. Questionsof fair access and distribution also arise with regard to the assumption of costs for suchinterventions by statutory health insurance.98) Questions of financing are likewise relevant with respect to the ethical concept of solidarity.From the point of view of a solidary community, there could be good reasons tosupport or even demand germline interventions for members with a cystic fibrosis mutation,either as an offer of help or out of a desire to reduce the costs for the entire community.The availability of germline interventions could, however, reduce solidarity withthose already affected and lead to stigmatisation and discrimination of those who decideagainst such an offer.99) Finally, responsibility towards persons who are affected in the future must be taken intoaccount. If the technology were one day to be sufficiently safe, effective and tolerable,there could be a responsibility towards future children and their offspring to prevent theirsuffering by taking advantage of these interventions and allowing or financing them. Anappropriate assumption of responsibility would include the duty to clarify the positiveand negative consequences outlined above in the best possible way and to reach a decisionon the permissibility of the intervention.100) Overall, for the ethical assessment of germline interventions in monogenic hereditary diseases– assuming sufficient safety and efficacy of the technology – no categorical reasons21for prohibiting such interventions can be derived from the application of the ethical concepts.Rather, the ethical concepts of the protection of life, of freedom and of beneficencesuggest for some a duty to permit such interventions. Against this backdrop, considerationsof non-maleficence, justice and solidarity do not provide any substantial argumentsagainst the interventions.101) Sceptics, on the other hand, are of the opinion that the technology in question is unlikelyto acquire the necessary degree of perfection. Together with the view that germline interventionsoverstretch the field of normal medical action and could lead to a problematicexpansion of the understanding of parental responsibility, this argumentation leads to therejection of germline interventions even when it comes to avoiding a monogenic hereditarydisease such as cystic fibrosis.102) In contrast to the application scenarios for germline interventions in monogenic diseases,the probability of developing a disease that is caused by several genes (polygenic) orother, non-genetic factors (multifactorial) could generally only be reduced by germlineintervention and not completely avoided.103) The contribution of individual genes to the probability of disease does, however, varygreatly. At one end of this spectrum, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer are exampleswhere the risk mainly stems from individual gene variants. A hypothetical case studyfeatures a woman with a BRCA1 mutation who has a 75 percent lifelong risk of developingbreast cancer and a 45 percent risk of developing ovarian cancer. The probability ofpassing on the mutated BRCA1 gene copy to a child is 50 percent. This is what the futuremother wishes to rule out with the help of a germline intervention.104) The ethical concept of human dignity does not provide any indications of an improperinstrumentalisation of the future child in this case, either. That the provision of a diseaseriskreducing germline intervention is called for with a view to human dignity is less clearthan when it comes to the certain avoidance of a monogenic hereditary disease. However,there might be a case for violation of human dignity if persons with a certain geneticdisposition would have to expect stigmatisation and discrimination. Then germline interventionsto reduce the risk of disease could be considered ethically called for because andinsofar as they could prevent such occurrences.105) With regard to risk-associated gene variants, the ethical concept of naturalness is regardedas even more problematic than in the case of monogenic hereditary diseases. The moredisease-associated gene sites are involved, the more difficult it is to distinguish "natural"22from pathological genetic make-up. In any case, from a developmental biology point ofview, there is no clear standard for the natural genetic make-up of humans.106) However, the ethical concepts of non-maleficence and beneficence continue to be relevant.People who bear an increased genetic risk for a disease and are aware of this maynot yet be ill. But even the prognosis can have an effect on a person's attitude to life, hisor her life planning, his or her physical self-image and, possibly, on working and insuranceconditions. One can, therefore, describe these individuals as "healthy ill". If the diseaseis dangerous, the risk is high and its prevention is either impossible or invasive andstressful, there may be a duty to offer germline interventions on the grounds of non-maleficenceand beneficence.107) In the case of germline interventions to reduce disease risks, the status of the "healthy ill"raises questions of justice when it comes to whether and when such measures should befinanced by the statutory health insurance system. It is difficult to determine the degreeof risk that justifies financing on the grounds of justice.108) The greater the stigmatisation and discrimination potential of a genetic predisposition, themore important become questions of solidarity with the individuals affected. This alonewould not result in a moral imperative to eliminate such diseases by means of germlineinterventions. It would rather be a matter of structuring the society of the future in such away that even the "healthy ill" can lead a good, existentially secure life.109) In summary, the ethical assessment of a germline intervention in the case of hereditarybreast cancer remains undecided even if a sufficiently effective and low-risk techniquewere to be available.110) At the other end of the spectrum of genetically (co-)induced diseases, the disease risk isdetermined by an array of genetic and non-genetic factors. This can be illustrated usingthe example of late onset Alzheimer's disease, for which in most cases no clear geneticcause can be determined.111) Nevertheless, scenarios are conceivable in which germline intervention to reduce the riskof Alzheimer’s disease could become of interest to people who wish to have children.The hypothetical case study considered in the Opinion is based on potential parents whohave both tested positive for the 11 gene variants that together increase the risk of lateonset Alzheimer's disease by up to 20 times. The couple wishes to have the risk variantsat all 11 affected gene sites corrected by germline intervention.23112) In this example, the application of the relevant ethical concepts basically leads to the sameresults as in the example of breast cancer. However, the specific disease risk of a futurechild can be predicted less clearly here due to the combinatorial possibilities betweenmany gene sites. It will probably remain lower than in the previous example due to thegreater contribution of non-genetic factors. This weakens the arguments for the urgencyof a germline intervention and strengthens those for foregoing germline interventions orpromoting other preventive measures.113) Possible future applications of germline interventions also include scenarios of improvingor enhancing certain features. Their potential spectrum is broad and diverse and it is difficultto distinguish them from therapeutic and preventive measures.114) Challenges also arise from the question of whether and on what basis genetic enhancementsshould be considered ethically different from the improvement of physical, mentalor character traits by means of traditional measures such as education. The latter are considerednot only morally permissible, but even desirable or necessary.115) In this context the ethical concept of human dignity is used in a prominent argument inorder to examine the possibility of illegitimate instrumentalisation of the future child. Anillegitimate intrumentalisation would be assumed if the traits of the child were partiallyaltered in such a way that they predispose it to a certain personality, a certain character orcertain behaviours that serve parental goals or motives. The child would then be restrictedin experiencing free self-determination and drawing up his or her own life goals and plans.116) Another subject of controversy is whether a growing use of germline interventions forenhancement purposes could lead to the revival of eugenic or stigmatising attitudes andthus affect the human dignity of entire social groups. This could then also affect a dimensionof human dignity that is linked to human self-understanding and the ethics associatedwith it: An imbalance could arise between parents, who make genetic decisions, and futurechildren, who are determined genetically by their parents, that collided with the basicprerequisites of a democratic society as a society of members with equal rights and duties.At best, such decisions by parents could be compatible with these prerequisites if the(subsequent) consent of the children concerned could almost certainly be assumed.117) Such fears do not justify a categorical ban of genetic enhancements, but they do emphasisean obligation on the part of the state to monitor such developments and, if necessary,take corrective action if germline interventions are to be permitted.24118) The ethical concept of freedom can be applied to questions related to enhancement bothwith a view to the freedom of the parents to shape their own children according to theirown ideas and with a view to safeguarding the child's autonomy as a future person, i.e. toindependently shape his or her own self. This consideration may lead to the conclusionthat improvements may be permissible if they constituted a gain for every conceivablelife plan of the future person, but not those that are intended to achieve highly specificabilities or qualities that might restrict the child in shaping his or her own life.119) The ethical concept of naturalness takes on more relevance in the case of enhancementquestions as these are particularly aimed at specific deviations from the norm that extendas far as the introduction of, for example, alien or artificial gene variants that are do notnormally occur in humans. This raises questions about the significance of naturalness perse as well as about the additional risks of deviating from evolved traits.120) The dual determination of the non-arbitrariness and the flexibility of human nature doesnot, however, furnish any clear arguments against enhancement interventions either. Thewarning against a shift in the structure of society by certain delimitations of human biology,however, seems plausible to many.121) With regard to non-maleficence and beneficence, it is often assumed that an opportunityriskassessment will yield significantly less favourable outcomes when applied to enhancementinterventions than when applied to therapeutic or preventive interventions.Possible risks of a germline intervention are more difficult to justify for the mere improvementof the normal condition.122) The ethical concept of justice indicates that genetic enhancements, even if they were practicableand permissible, would have to remain a private financial matter for the foreseeablefuture. The coverage of costs by the public health system should be ruled out, since itcannot simply extend its responsibility to treatments that are defined precisely in contrastto therapy and medical prevention. It would be conceivable to finance enhancements indirectly(e.g. through tax deductibility) at some point in the future. But as long as this isnot the case, a social practice of permitted germline enhancements could further widenthe gap between rich and poor and exacerbate social inequality of opportunity.123) Likewise, many see the danger of a creeping change of attitudes in society, which couldundermine conditions of political justice, but also solidarity-based support. This wouldbe the case if, at some point, coercive pressure were to be exerted to have enhancementscarried out on one's own children in order to guarantee their later competitiveness in the25best possible way. In a liberal society, however, the option must be upheld of being ableto refuse interventions in the genome of one's own children without having to fear disadvantagesfor their later lives. This justifies an obligation on the part of the state to monitorand, if necessary, intervene.124) In the case of enhancements, the ethical concept of responsibility is often related to thegenetic constitution of future generations, with a view to both negative and positive consequences.On the other hand, it is argued that individual genetic changes would havescarcely any impact at the population level. The assumption of such a future responsibilityis, therefore, exaggerated.125) In summary, it can be observed that enhancements that would direct reproductive behaviourfor collective purposes in a totalitarian manner by the state are clearly prohibited ifthe relevant ethical concepts that offer orientation are taken into account. In the case ofindividual decisions on enhancements by parents, such interventions would be inadmissibleif they sought to enhance traits that only appeared meaningful in special life plansenvisaged by the parents for their child.126) Beyond these cases, the assessment is less clear. The concern about negative social effectsof enhancements, namely the aggravation of justice problems and the emergence of culturalpatterns of interpretation characterised by a lack of solidarity, are predominantlydeemed to be important. For some, however, this does not justify any prohibitions, butmerely an obligation on the part of the state to monitor such developments and, if necessary,to take regulatory countermeasures if the phenomena in question can actually beproven.26Recommendations and decision pathsThis Opinion has set itself the task of reconstructing and assessing the main facets and argumentsof the complex debate surrounding the ethical evaluation of germline interventions. Itseeks to present these arguments in a comprehensible manner and make them accessible topublic and international debate. There have been repeated calls for this debate, not least by theGerman Ethics Council itself.To this end, the main paths on the road to conceivable decisions on basic and preclinical researchon the one hand and clinical applications on the other are depicted in a decision tree (seebook cover) and summarised below. With this tree it is possible to illustrate at which pointsdecision paths take different forks in the road, i.e. where ethical concepts are interpreted differentlyand can thus be used to justify differing conclusions about what the next steps should be.An understanding of these main forks in the argumentation helps to throw light on the differentpossible positions and on the ensuing consequences in a clear and transparent manner.However, prior to this, a number of conclusions are presented that have been shown to be capableof achieving a consensus in the German Ethics Council. They can be seen as overarchingrecommendations irrespective of how the possible use of germline interventions is evaluatedoverall (and, perhaps, controversially).Overarching conclusions and recommendations1. The ethical analysis does not lead to any categorical inviolability of the human germline.2. The assessment of the permissibility of germline interventions should not be reduced to amere risk and opportunity analysis. Rather, it should be based on the ethical concepts ofhuman dignity, protection of life and integrity, freedom, non-maleficence and beneficence,naturalness, justice, solidarity and responsibility.3. The prerequisite for permissibility is, in any case, a sufficient degree of safety and efficacyof such interventions.4. The German Ethics Council calls for an international moratorium on the clinical applicationof germline interventions in humans, and recommends that the German Bundestag and theFederal Government work towards a binding international agreement, preferably under theaegis of the United Nations.This moratorium should firstly create a forum for a transparent process of discussion andevaluation of the possible goals of germline interventions in humans to determine in which27cases and under what conditions germline interventions are to be classified as expedient andlegitimate in future.Secondly, it should allow time for careful basic and preclinical research, prevent prematureapplication and classify any such application as a serious violation of both good scientificpractice and general rules of good human coexistence.Thirdly, it should create an arena for the elaboration of suitable instruments for internationalregulation.The moratorium should undergo transparent regular review.5. There is likewise agreement within the German Ethics Council that basic research withoutrecourse to human embryos in vitro should be promoted with a view to gaining a deeperunderstanding of the effects of germline interventions in order to improve the level ofknowledge about their safety and efficacy. This includes research involving synthetic humanentities with embryo-like features provided they do not have embryo status.6. Furthermore, the German Ethics Council recommends setting up an international agencythat would be entrusted with at least two fundamental tasks:Firstly, it should draw up and establish global scientific and ethical standards for researchon and the practice of germline interventions in humans. It should monitor compliance withthese standards wherever such research or practice is permissible. The register that is currentlybeing put in place by the World Health Organisation could be one of the necessaryfoundations for this task.Secondly, a standing committee should be set up within this agency to address the scientific,medical, ethical, legal, societal and political implications of germline interventions in humans,to set out possible solutions to the problems that arise and, in this way, to make acontribution to transparency and awareness-raising amongst the public at large.7. This agency must be able to build on a broad national and international debate. The GermanEthics Council, therefore, reiterates the demand formulated in its ad hoc recommendationof 29 September 2017 for the promotion of a global societal discourse on germline interventions.All relevant societal groups must be involved in this international exchange onappropriate ethical standards for the assessment of possible future applications. An internationalconference hosted by the United Nations or the World Health Organisation wouldsend out a welcome signal for such a development on the global level, too.28It goes without saying that public debate and awareness-raising must be stepped up in Germany,too. Various tried-and-tested formats of participation should be encouraged. The exchangeof information should be ensured not just by the scientific community but also bypublic bodies. The German Ethics Council recommends that the Federal Governmentlaunch a structured civic discourse.Decision pathsAlthough there is consensus within the German Ethics Council on the above-mentioned overarchingrecommendations, the concrete ethical evaluation of germline interventions may varyand even take on a controversial note, depending on the interpretation of the relevant ethicalconcepts and the application context. One and the same ethical concept can be interpreted verydifferently with regard to individual questions and individual application scenarios. As outlinedin the Executive Summary and extensively addressed in the long version of this Opinion, thespectrum of the underlying arguments is highly detailed and nuanced. Nonetheless, some clearpositions can be formulated and depicted as paths in a decision tree (see book cover). Thesepaths touch on both basic and preclinical research on germline interventions and their clinicalapplication. The questions (Q) take on a key or course-setting role in the decision-making processes,which means that the direction taken by the next sections of the paths will be determinedby whether the answer to them is yes or no. Each section of these paths or each position (P)leads to further questions and, possibly, to specific consequences (C) that arise from a particulardecision.1Most of the questions in the decision tree are geared towards whether an action may and alsowhether it should be carried out. May questions escalate ethical problems, thereby creating clarityand transparency. In some decision-making situations, however, they may conceal importantnuances that are only revealed by the answer to the question whether an action which may becarried out, i.e. which is not prohibited, should also be carried out. Anyone who believes anaction to be not only permissible but even necessary will answer this question in the affirmative.Conversely, anyone who does not want an action to be prohibited but nonetheless believes thatit should not be carried out, will answer no, perhaps because there are more suitable alternatives1 Courses of action are not formulated with any claim to completeness but are exemplary in nature. For each onekey examples are given.29that should be given preference in the weighing up process. Certain should questions, whichthus go beyond the may questions sometimes facilitate a decisive differentiation when it comesto ethical orientation. Where such a distinction is relevant, the text emphasises this below.


Decision paths in the field of preclinical researchQuestion 1: Is the human germline inviolable?Any reflections on germline interventions begin with the fundamental question whether thehuman germline may be interfered with at all or whether it is categorically inviolable and,therefore, basically precluded from any genetic engineering intervention (Q1). The answer ofthe German Ethics Council is a unanimous no to this categorical inviolability (P1b). It bases itsanswer more particularly on the following reasons: The germline, as such, cannot be the objector the substrate of the protection of dignity or life. Both must refer to concrete or, at least,potential persons. Furthermore, whilst direct interventions always require special justificationand verification, the germline is nonetheless constantly being altered as a consequence of naturalprocesses and human action. Consequently, prima facie arguments in favour of naturalnesslack conviction (ethical concept naturalness). If the answer to the question 1 is no (P1b), this leads to the next question (Q2).Possible reasons that may lead to a divergent position (P1a) are also mentioned here in order tosupport a substantial normative debate (see section 5.1). The view that the protection of dignityshould be afforded not only to the person but already to the germline of a human being (ethicalconcept human dignity) could back a categorical inviolability. Or it could be argued that thegermline constituted the naturally given basis of every developing human being and may not,therefore, be purposefully modified (ethical concept naturalness). This position leads to severalpotential courses of action. They may include upholding existing prohibitions on research intogermline interventions and their application or the more precise detailing or tightening of theseprohibitions, for instance in the German Embryo Protection Act. Equally, there could be movesto secure the corresponding prohibitions through globally valid agreements. If the answer to question 1 is yes (P1a), this leads directly to the first consequence (C1):Germline interventions are ruled out.Question 2: May/should the goal of germline intervention be pursued?It does not necessarily follow from the conviction that the human germline is not, in principle,inviolable that germline interventions may or should be undertaken. There could be other reasonsthat fundamentally contest the legitimacy of this goal (may) or at least advocate the ethicallymandated renunciation of this goal (should not). The second question (Q2) examineswhether this is the case.32A large majority in the German Ethics Council is of the opinion that there are no further fundamentalreasons for not pursuing the development of germline interventions in humans, and itgives an affirmative response to question 2 (P2a). In its opinion none of the ethical conceptssuggests that germline interventions are, in principle, ethically reprehensible. On the contrary,arguments drawn from the ethical concepts of freedom, non-maleficence and beneficence, justiceand solidarity advocate thorough and responsible research into the opportunities and risksof the new technology. Some people even feel that the further pursuit of the goal of germlineinterventions is necessary because it can give couples with serious hereditary diseases a chanceof conceiving a healthy child. Consequently, it is their belief that it is ethically justified and,where appropriate, necessary to drive research that looks into the opportunities for developingthese technologies and assessing the safety and efficacy of germline interventions. If the answer to question 2 is yes (P2a), this leads to the third question (Q3).By contrast, a few members of the German Ethics Council are of the opinion that, for otherfundamental reasons, interventions in the human germline may or at least should not be undertaken(P2b). Their stance is based on serious doubts that germline interventions can achieveany meaningful objectives at all, regardless of the individual application scenario. This drawsfirstly on the underlying reflection that germline interventions are not a procedure for treatingor healing living individuals who have a disease. Ultimately, they pursue the goal of fulfillinga parent's wish for genetically related children who do or do not possess specific genetic traits.In their opinion germline intervention can be considered solely a reproductive technology. Thegoal of having genetically related children might be legitimate but, given the outlay requiredand the potential risks of germline interventions, it is seen as not imperative enough in any ofthe application scenarios discussed to justify imposing the associated risks on children and theiroffspring. It should not, therefore, be generally assumed that a germline intervention was permittedor even necessary with reference to the ethical concepts of beneficence or freedom.Furthermore, when it comes to the goal of preventing serious hereditary diseases, it should beborne in mind that, in the vast majority of cases, PGD alone and, in the rare exceptional casesin which it was not possible, sperm or egg donation (although the latter is currently prohibitedin Germany) would involve less outlay when it came to achieving this goal. Consequently,solidarity with couples wishing to have a child who does or does not have specific geneticpredispositions, could not impose the development of corresponding germline modifications.33Another fundamental objection is that, given the complexity of genetic and epigenetic processes,it is thought to be extremely unlikely that the risks could be reduced to an acceptablelevel in relation to the goals, even in the long term.Finally, with reference to social justice the argument is advanced that the resources needed forgermline interventions and the corresponding research could be put to better use in other ways.If, against the backdrop of these arguments, the fundamental renunciation of the further pursuitof germline interventions is advocated, then one potential course of action might be to invest inthose research activities and therapeutic applications which reduce or even eliminate geneticallyinduced burdens on people without germline interventions. Similarly, recourse could be madeto alternatives such as adoption or sperm donation.Independently of this, reference is made in this context to the option of approving egg donation. If the answer to question 2 is no (P2b), this leads back to the ruling out of germlineinterventions (C1).Question 3: May/should research involving the destruction of human embryos in vitro becarried out?If germline interventions are not ruled out from the very outset, this leads to the stage of basicand preclinical research. This stage encompasses both scientific endeavours to improve the reliabilityof genome editing techniques and the investigation of concrete opportunities ofgermline interventions in preclinical model systems. This then raises a further question, thealternatives of which are also a subject of contention within the German Ethics Council. Mayresearch be carried out on viable embryos in vitro? Such research involves early human embryos,the development of which is interrupted after a limited period of time (currently maximum14 days as a rule) and which are then subsequently discarded. The respective interpretationof the ethical concept of protection of life and integrity is particularly important when itcomes to answering this question.Most Council members answer yes to the permissibility of research involving early human embryosin vitro (P3a). If the increased knowledge that can be obtained through embryo researchcan significantly reduce the risks for humans born in the context of a later clinical application,they even believe that embryo research is necessary and, therefore, give an affirmative answerto question 3 also along the lines of “should" (ethical concepts non-maleficence and responsibility).34Proponents of this position might argue that the use of germline interventions to induce the birthof a human being should, in any case, be preceded by the corresponding research on early humanembryos in vitro in order to assess the opportunities and risks of the intervention. If the answer to question 3 is yes (P3a), embryo research would have to be permitted inGermany. This consequence (C2) encompasses the corresponding statutory amendments.There are, however, major differences in the arguments advanced in this respect and the resultingconditions under which embryo research is deemed to be acceptable. They lead to differentpositions:Two of them (P3a.1 and P3a.2) are in agreement that early embryonic life in vitro demandsrespect and great care in its handling but does not yet enjoy the full protection of human dignity(ethical concepts human dignity and protection of life and integrity).Of the majority of Council members who answered "yes" to question 3, a majority again backsthe fundamental legitimacy of embryo research but wishes to allow it solely in what are knownas surplus embryos, i.e. embryos created during fertility treatment but which are definitely nolonger going to be used for this purpose (P3a.1). The precondition for the use of these embryosfor research purposes would be the consent of the couples from whom the gametes originated.Another option would be the further development of surplus impregnated eggs into embryos.The release for research purposes of impregnated eggs, whose fertilisation process has begunbut has not yet been completed, would have to be evaluated in the same way as the release ofembryos after completed fertilisation. In both cases we are dealing with early human life whichwas originally produced for reproductive purposes but which cannot or should no longer beused for this purpose. In contrast, the express generation of embryos for research is ruled out asnot permissible according to this position. This position (P3a.1) leads to consequence 2 – the approval of embryo research– but only for surplus embryos and impregnated egg cells.In contrast, a minority of the Council members who answered "yes" to question 3 do not ruleout the express generation of embryos from egg and sperm cells donated specifically for researchpurposes (P3a.2). They argue in favour of the permissibility of this option provided thepersons from whom the germ cells originate have expressly agreed to their use for these purposes.35 This position (P3a.2) also leads to consequence 2 – approval of embryo research– including approval of the express generation of human embryos for researchpurposes.According to a stricter variant, to which one member of the German Ethics Council also subscribes,the permissibility of embryo research is, in principle, rejected on the basis of the samearguments as presented in position 3b. However, certain circumstances are recognised underwhich this research should be permissible by way of exception and as a last resort (P3a.3).Certain germline modification applications pursue such morally high-ranking goals that ultimatelythe categorical prohibition of embryo research could become porous (ethical conceptsprotection of life and integrity, beneficence and solidarity). This position would likewise permitembryo research only in the case of surplus embryos generated by reproductive medicine. Itwould, however, also require that, for as long and as far as possible, priority was to be given toalternative research methods. Furthermore, it ties this exception to a key date by which thesurplus embryos must have been generated, similar to the Stem Cell Act. This key date rule isintended to thwart incentives for the generation of additional surplus embryos. Approval of embryo research only as a last resort (P3a.3) likewise leads to consequence2 – the approval of embryo research. At the same time, it does imposestrict conditions on this approval.Others again, including a minority of Council members, strictly reject the permissibility of anyembryo research (P3b). For them, every embryo created enjoys full protection of dignity fromthe very outset. This rules out any illegitimate instrumentalisation through research, and thisprotection includes an unconditional right to life (ethical concepts human dignity, protection oflife and integrity). For them, the further development of the technology for interventions in thehuman germline is permissible only if it takes place without embryo research. Any necessarypreclinical research would have to be restricted to alternative research subjects (for instanceanimals, cell cultures or SHEEFs). With reference to the ethical concept of protection of lifeand integrity, researchers should content themselves with the possibilities for expandingknowledge through these experiments and try to take the technology to a level of maturitydeemed sufficient to progress to clinical research on germline interventions without embryoresearch. Nonetheless, this raises another ethical question: A decision must be taken on how tohandle knowledge generated in other countries through embryo research. If the answer to question 3 is no (P3b), this takes us straight to the fourth question (Q4).36Question 4: May/should the results of embryo research be utilised even if one rejects suchresearch oneself?There are good scientific reasons for the assumption that molecular, cell and developmentalbiological processes in conjunction with a genetic modification to the human germline couldbe understood more easily if they were also researched in viable human embryos. That explainswhy this research is permissible in many countries. This type of knowledge is, therefore, alreadybeing generated. If one backs position 3b, then one also has to decide whether one would bewilling to declare the use of such knowledge as permissible and whether one would be willingto build further research in one's own country also on the contribution made to germline interventiontechnologies by embryo research elsewhere, even though one believes it is right toprohibit such research on ethical grounds.The answer given to this question may be no, as is the case for some Council members, whobase this on the view that the use of third party research findings which have been obtainedunder conditions deemed to be unacceptable, would be morally reprehensible or irresponsible("free riding" accusation, ethical concepts justice, responsibility). If one supports this view(P4b), then one would either have to provide evidence, on the threshold to clinical research,that the findings obtained without embryo research are sufficient to justify the transition to thefirst clinical trials or – if this is not possible – to refrain from germline interventions (C1). If the answer to question 4 (P4b) is no, this leads to consequence 3 according to whichfurther research on germline interventions is only to be carried forward without embryoresearch, and no recourse may be made to the embryo research findings of others either.However the answer to question 4 can also be in the affirmative, as is the case for some otherCouncil members. They argue that the use of research findings of third parties neither constitutessymbolic approval of embryo research outside Germany nor does it lead to an increase inthe number of embryos destroyed abroad (P4a, ethical concepts protection of life and integrity,justice). The accusation of expressive moral dissonance ("double standards") can be counteredby the fact that the rejection of embryo research within a specific population can be recognisedthrough a prohibition without declaring this prohibition to be a genuinely moral (compelling)norm which everyone would have to share and deem plausible (ethical concept responsibility). If the answer to question 4 is yes (P4a), this means refraining from direct embryo researchbut does not rule out using the research findings of others obtained by usinghuman embryos.37Irrespective of the path along which research in the preclinical phase progresses, the questionwill crop up at some point in the future as to whether research can move on to the clinical stage.Question 5: May/should there be a transition to clinical research?This question requires examination of whether, within the framework of basic and preclinicalresearch, certain minimum safety and efficacy requirements regarding germline interventionsin humans are met and whether, consequently, fundamental safety concerns or basic doubtsabout the usefulness of germline interventions have been sufficiently dispelled to justify thetransition to clinical research (with the goal of reproduction) for individual scenarios.At the time of publication, the answer to this question is unanimously "no" within the GermanEthics Council and overwhelmingly "no" on the international stage (P5b.1). Globally, there isalmost a comprehensive consensus that this technology is, in any case at the present time, stillso immature that major tasks for basic and preclinical research have yet to be resolved. If the answer to question 5 is currently no (P5b.1), this has the consequence that a transitionto clinical trials can for now be ruled out as impermissible (C4). For this reasonthe German Ethics Council unanimously recommends at this point in time a moratoriumon applications (see recommendation 4).However, there are some doubts whether, given the complex nature of inheritance processes,adequate safety and appropriate risk minimisation will ever be achievable. If, after the full exploitation of justifiable research efforts, the answer to question 5 becomesa definitive no (P5b.2), this leads to a permanent renunciation of germline interventions(C1).If, on the other hand, in the light of future progress in preclinical research, the conclusion is oneday reached that a suitable application scenario has been identified and the minimum safety andefficacy requirements regarding germline interventions have been sufficiently met, then the answerto question 5 will be yes and a transition to clinical research could, in principle, be considered. If the answer to question 5 (P5a) is yes, this paves the way for a transition to clinicaltrials and to questions 6.1-6.3, but only if certain conditions outlined in the followingsection are met.38Decision paths in the transitions to clinical applicationA positive answer to question 5 marks the beginning of all decision paths in the field of clinicalapplication in the context of human reproduction. This comprises at least two parts which arealso arranged in chronological order: firstly, clinical trials in which an application is clinicallytested for the first time, and secondly, the transition to regular clinical application which canonly be considered if the clinical trials prove successful.Prior to commencing clinical trials, the minimum safety and efficacy requirements of the technologyto be used must be ensured, and appropriate oversight procedures and accompanyinggovernance structures put in place for the intended clinical research (Cd1): The treatment in question must have been sufficiently tested in a suitable animal modeland in models with human cells. It must be possible to assess the opportunities and risks arising from the application inhumans in a transparent and expert-based manner, also with a view to any late onsettraits. The choice of a concrete application must also be backed by the reasoning that there areno alternative, less risky and effective treatments for this condition. Adequate civic participation procedures must have taken place beforehand, including inparticular the relevant patient associations, to look at expectations, wishes, fears andassessments. The selection of the trial population will have been carefully checked for plausibility inan appropriate risk-benefit ratio. A detailed research plan, containing the corresponding information, consent, supervisoryand control mechanisms in accordance with the established standards for clinicalresearch will be available and will have been approved by the competent governancebodies. The organisation carrying out the trial undertakes to continue the scientific support forfuture persons born following germline interventions for an appropriately long trial periodafter their birth. The project would have to be registered with the international institution recommendedby the German Ethics Council (see recommendation 6). The trial participants will have adequate insurance cover.39 Long-term accompanying research on possible individual, cultural and societal consequencesof the respective interventions is to be guaranteed.The transition to regular clinical application, in turn, presupposes that, after completion of theclinical trials, the minimum safety, efficacy and tolerability requirements will be deemed tohave been met and that the requirements in terms of their appropriate legal and social designand support will have been clarified and compliance ensured (Cd2). This also includes criteriafor the practical design of the concrete clinical application, including guidance about to whomit may be offered, when and under which conditions, which societal processes may have toaccompany the introduction of a specific treatment option and how, where appropriate, it shouldbe financed. Here, too, some further fundamental conditions can be formulated which shouldbe met for the transition to the regular application of germline interventions: evidence-based research on mortality, morbidity, quality of life, etc. after germline interventionscompared with alternative treatment scenarios; long-term monitoring of possible population effects; accompanying ethical and socio-empirical research on the assessment of the social impact; health economics research on assessing the financing questions within the frameworkof statutory health insurance; ongoing communication and public participation.Whether some of these criteria for the transitions to the two stages of clinical application canbe regarded as having been met in a concrete case, will depend on the specific objectives pursued,the methods to be used and the current empirical state of play. Both in the weighing up ofthe opportunities and risks and in the application of ethical concepts, this can lead to differentresults. Although the concrete weighing up can thus ultimately only be undertaken for eachindividual case of application and with due consideration of the empirical findings available atthat time, a generalisation of the ethical criteria for the evaluation of each of the three clinicalapplication contexts examined in Chapter 4 is possible for both stages of the transition to clinicalapplication.As a result, the last question makes the permissibility of certain germline interventions dependenton the premise that the conditions for the transition to clinical trials and then to regularapplication have been fulfilled. At the time of publication of this Opinion, this question can be40raised and answered on a general level for the three clinical application contexts developed inChapter 4.Question 6.1: May/should germline interventions be carried out to prevent hereditarydisorders?Monogenic hereditary disorders, such as cystic fibrosis, constitute a first area of clinical application.The question whether genetic predispositions to these disorders may be correctedthrough germline interventions – if this is possible – is answered in the affirmative by the vastmajority of the members of the German Ethics Council for the following reasons (P6.1a): Theprospect of an individual being able to lead his or her life without being restricted/burdened bya monogenic hereditary disorder is a high-ranking good. Its worthiness of protection results inparticular from the ethical concepts of freedom, non-maleficence and beneficence. Or: The alternative,PGD, is not possible in some cases, for example if both partners carry the gene oronly a few eggs can be harvested from the woman for fertilisation because of her age. Or:Possible negative effects from the angle of social justice or solidarity can be minimised throughcorresponding statutory provisions. For example, equal access to cost-intensive therapy (ethicalconcept justice) would have to be ensured as would the willingness to support the refinancingof lifelong cost-intensive treatment for those individuals whose parents did not undertake agenetic correction by means of germline intervention (ethical concept solidarity).Nevertheless, it would have to be examined in each individual case whether the conditionsoutlined above (Cd1 and Cd2) have been met. In the case of the transition to regular application,the extent to which these clearly therapeutic applications could be financed through statutoryhealth insurance would also have to be clarified. If the answer to question 6.1 is yes (P6.1a), this leads to the consequence 6.1 accordingto which germline interventions to avoid monogenic hereditary disorders are, in principle,permissible if the above conditions are met – provided the conditions for the transitionto clinical trials (Cd1) and a subsequent transition to regular application (Cd2)can be met in each individual case.One can, like a minority of the members of the German Ethics Council, negate the legitimacyor, at least, the usefulness of avoiding genetic predispositions to monogenic hereditary disordersthrough germline interventions (P6.1b). The following reasons could be given: PGD is necessaryalso in the case of germline therapy – at least as long as it is not possible to undertake boththe intervention and its verification in cell lines. In most cases, PGD will permit the selection41of clinically unaffected embryos even without germline intervention. This means that agermline intervention would only make sense in the very rare constellations in which this is notpossible (for instance because both parents pass on the disorder homozygously). In these clearlyforeseeable constellations it would, however, be reasonable to expect parents to abandon theirwish for genetically related children in favour of parenthood through sperm donation or adoption(ethical concept freedom). Or: The advantages that may be gained from a less stressful lifethanks to the prevention of the disorder by germline therapy for a few individuals cannot counterbalancethe disadvantages from deficits in justice and solidarity that may arise for individualswho suffer from these disorders now or in the future (ethical concepts justice and solidarity). If the answer to question 6.1 is no (P6.1b), this means that germline interventions arenot permissible for the purpose of avoiding monogenic hereditary disorders (C5.1).Question 6.2: May/should germline interventions be carried out to reduce the risk of disease?Given the broad spectrum of complex disease risks, which extends from almost monogenicburdens such as hereditary breast cancer to multifactorial causes such as late onset Alzheimer'sdisease, the German Ethics Council has refrained from a general vote on this question. Both theopportunities offered by such germline interventions and the risks and technical difficultiesassociated with them, very much depend on where a concrete risk of disease would fall in thisspectrum. The factors on which a decision could be based include the likelihood of sufficientlysafe and efficacious applications, the extent of risk minimisation that can be expected at bestand the alternative prevention and treatment approaches available. The higher the number oftarget sites in the genome that are to be treated simultaneously, the lower the contribution of anindividual gene to the risk and the more complex the interaction with other factors, the lesslikely are the chances of a positive assessment. For the purposes of a provisional exploration ofthis topic, supporting and sceptical arguments are presented below.The following reasons can be put forward to support an affirmative answer to the questionwhether genetic disease risks may be reduced with the help of germline interventions (P6.2a):Germline interventions will mainly benefit those individuals whose genetic make-up is to bemodified. This will preserve their concept of being an end in themselves. The potentially significantbenefit of an intervention allows the counter-factual assumption that they would agreeto the intervention (ethical concept human dignity). Both the reproductive freedom of parentsand the real freedom of future persons are preserved and secured in the long term (ethical con42cept freedom). The danger of losing self-determination and social participation as a consequenceof a disease such as breast cancer or dementia or being considerably psychologicallyburdened already by knowledge of the elevated genetic risk, is reduced (ethical concepts humandignity, non-maleficence). Similarly, burdens due to more intensive or more frequent healthcheck-ups can be avoided. Reducing the risk of illness to the risks of the general populationsecures or increases equal opportunities. The potentially high initial costs, which may be consideredproblematic in terms of theoretical justice, the danger of discrimination and the exclusionof persons who cannot afford the therapy in question, can all be limited (ethical conceptjustice). Based on experience with other disorders, there are no grounds for fears that societywill be less willing to support those individuals whose risks of disease have not been minimisedby germline intervention (ethical concept solidarity)In order to verify or confirm these assessments, increased research could be advocated to realisticallyestimate the relevant risk minimisation through germline interventions. Similarly, anevidence-based comparison with other ways of preventing and treating diseases would also benecessary, as would monitoring for adverse effects. Strict requirements could likewise be putin place for the transition to clinical application, such as correspondingly robust evidence of arisk minimisation with a relevant impact on the quality of life, at least to the risk level of thepopulation at large. Consideration should also be given to health economics research to assessthe funding questions within the framework of statutory health insurance. If the answer to question 6.2 is yes, germline interventions are also to be deemed permissiblein principle to minimise the risk of disease (C6.2) – provided that the conditionsfor the transition to clinical trials (Cd1) and a subsequent transition to regular application(Cd2) have been met.The following reasons can be presented that argue against a minimisation of disease riskthrough germline therapy (P6.2b):Even if such germline interventions do not directly violate the dignity of the persons concerned,societal attitudes about the burden to society generated by the financial follow-up costs of anillness, could create tendencies to reduce those persons who may still suffer from that illness inthe future to a mere "cost factor" and, by extension, to their "objectification". This would defacto erode the recognition of their status of being an end in themselves (ethical concept humandignity). The gains in freedom or self-determination, social participation etc. that may be derivedfrom minimising the risks of illness do not outweigh the disadvantages that arise fromnegative justice and solidarity effects, such as discrimination against those individuals who43cannot undergo germline modifications or the one-sided allocation of resources (ethical conceptsjustice and solidarity). Particularly in the case of multifactorial diseases like dementia,minimising the risks of disease through germline interventions can promote a focussing on geneticfactors (risk of "genetic reductionism"). As a result, far more powerful factors such asnutrition or lifestyle could be neglected (ethical concepts non-maleficence and beneficence).Germline interventions in the case of multifactorial disease risks can only minimise these risksto a limited degree. However, they could nurture unrealistic expectations of perfectibility (ethicalconcept naturalness).Against the backdrop of these arguments, research on and investments in other methods ofminimising the risk of disease would be the preferred option. If the answer to question 6.2 is no (P6.2b), this leads to the ruling out of germline interventionsto minimise the risk of disease (C5.2).Question 6.3: May/should germline interventions be carried out for enhancement purposes?A third area of clinical application comprises germline interventions that serve to improve specifictraits (enhancement). Here, too, the spectrum of imagined interventions ranges from thosethat focus on a single gene site to interventions at various gene sites where the interactionsbetween genetic and other factors will probably still continue to be poorly understood for theforeseeable future.The evaluation also depends on several factors, for instance the objectives pursued, the anticipatedlevel of risk and environmental influences. The more complex the causes of the trait tobe modified are and the less urgent the reasons for its modification, the more likely objectionsto any intervention will be. For many Council members, an evaluation of enhancement applicationsvery much hinges on these aspects. A blanket affirmative or negative response to thequestion of permissibility would, therefore, be inappropriate. For the purposes of a provisionalexploration of this topic, supporting and sceptical arguments are presented below.The following reasons can be given in favour of enhancement options (P6.3a): The individualright to shape one’s own body and personality and also the parent's right to freedom when itcomes to shaping their own children in line with their own ideas of a good life must be guaranteed(ethical concept freedom). The concerns regarding the ethical concepts of solidarity andjustice, i.e. the fears of an aggravation of injustice and the emergence of anti-solidary interpre44tation patterns, are deemed to be important but are not sufficient reasons to prohibit enhancement.They merely justify an obligation for the state to monitor such developments and, wherenecessary, introduce regulatory counter-measures.In order to defuse such fears, increased research could be called for to realistically assess thehealth risks and social impacts, or particularly stringent conditions could be demanded for thetransition to clinical application. Some thought would also have to be given to the economicdimension, be it the explicit exclusion of enhancement measures from statutory health insuranceor – if they were to be desired by society as a whole – their funding from tax revenues. If the answer to question 6.3 is yes, germline interventions for enhancement purposeswould also be permissible provided they meet the above-mentioned criteria for the transitionsto clinical application (C6.3).The permissibility of enhancement can also be negated (P6.3b). The following reasons can bepresented to back this position: All state-controlled enhancement interventions for the widespreadenforcement of eugenic goals are to be rejected as they constitute a violation of theprohibition of instrumentalisation on the grounds of the ethical concept of human dignity. Asfar as purely private enhancements are concerned, their permissibility could encourage a creepingshift in attitude towards ideologies of "feasibility" of the human condition, they could reinforceprevailing social stereotypes, and generate new dominant cultural patterns of interpretationwhich could have a negative impact on entire sections of the population (ethical concepthuman dignity). Furthermore, free decisions of parents about their reproductive decisions couldbe restricted by societal pressure or new and problematic forms of responsibility could be imposedon them (ethical concepts freedom and responsibility). The inner freedom and the conceptof being an end in itself of a child who has been modified, could also be affected if traitswere changed that (co-)determine his or her future character (ethical concepts freedom, humandignity). Enhancement goals are often accorded lower moral priority than medical interventions.Consequently, particularly strict criteria are advocated for risk assessment and non-maleficence(ethical concept non-maleficence). In addition, attention is drawn to the negative consequencesfor distributive, political and participatory justice. There are likewise fears of a creepingerosion of the willingness to support solidarity in society (ethical concepts justice, solidarity).Should these concerns lead to demands for blanket prohibitions of germline interventions forenhancement purposes, and if therapeutic and preventive germline interventions were to becomefeasible and permissible one day, then there would have to be an even more cautious45determination of how to draw the boundaries between therapeutic, preventive and enhancinginterventions. Nonetheless, the following conclusion applies: If the answer to question 6.3 is no (P6.3b), the consequence is that germline interventionsfor enhancement purposes are rejected (C5.3).Final remarksThe above considerations clearly show that it can be difficult to differentiate between the conceivableapplication contexts. Furthermore, the range of complexity of the respective applicationsand the related opportunities and risks can vary considerably. For these reasons, a seriousethical evaluation of germline interventions – if one considers them to be ethically justifiableat all – can only be undertaken on a case-by-case basis and with reference to the respectiverelevant ethical concepts.In principle, the less obvious any medical need is, the stricter the safety and efficacy requirementsand, by extension, the innocuousness requirements for germline interventions will haveto be. It is almost impossible to estimate and is doubtful in many respects whether acceptableminimum standards can ever be met at all, for any application, given the current state of technologydevelopment. Even if germline interventions were then in principle considered ethicallylegitimate, the demand would be, at least for pioneer applications, that the associated risks anduncertainties should only be tolerated to prevent severe disorders for which there are no alternativetreatments.Should such pioneer applications prove successful and their further technological developmentlook promising, there are likely to be demands for an extension of treatment options to encompassless serious diseases, the mere minimisation of disease risks and, ultimately, enhancements.These developments may never happen. However, should they become reality, the GermanEthics Council deems the path set out in this Opinion of cautiously weighing up the opportunitiesand risks based on the outlined ethical concepts, to be absolutely essential.